tags:: nasin

- "Never trust a type theorist who has not changed their mind about equality at least once." - Conor McBride #quote
- In its simplest form types **construct** a collection of elements.
	- For example in elementary school we learn that all of the following are natural numbers:
	  1, 5, 23, 52034, 45934893475, 2405234, 8923
	- We learn this by first asserting that 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 are natural numbers and that we can then glue as many of 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 to the number as we want and still receive a natural number.
	- In [[Gentzen style logic]] this looks as follows and is the preferred way of constructing types:
	  $\dfrac{}{1 : \mathbb{N}}(one)$, $\dfrac{}{2 : \mathbb{N}}(two)$, $\dfrac{}{3 : \mathbb{N}}(three)$, $\dfrac{}{4 : \mathbb{N}}(four)$, $\dfrac{}{5 : \mathbb{N}}(five)$
	  
	  $\dfrac{}{6 : \mathbb{N}}(six)$, $\dfrac{}{7 : \mathbb{N}}(seven)$, $\dfrac{}{8 : \mathbb{N}}(eight)$, $\dfrac{}{9 : \mathbb{N}}(nine)$
	- In addition, we learn that:
	  $\dfrac{a : \mathbb{Z}}{a0 : \mathbb{Z}}(glue-0)$,$\dfrac{a : \mathbb{Z}}{a1 : \mathbb{Z}}(glue-1)$,$\dfrac{a : \mathbb{Z}}{a2 : \mathbb{Z}}(glue-2)$,$\dfrac{a : \mathbb{Z}}{a3 : \mathbb{Z}}(glue-3)$,$\dfrac{a : \mathbb{Z}}{a4 : \mathbb{Z}}(glue-4)$,
	  
	  $\dfrac{a : \mathbb{Z}}{a5 : \mathbb{Z}}(glue-5)$,$\dfrac{a : \mathbb{Z}}{a6 : \mathbb{Z}}(glue-6)$,$\dfrac{a : \mathbb{Z}}{a7 : \mathbb{Z}}(glue-7)$, $\dfrac{a : \mathbb{Z}}{a8 : \mathbb{Z}}(glue-8)$, $\dfrac{a : \mathbb{Z}}{a9 : \mathbb{Z}}(glue-9)$
	- A constructive prove that 1027 is a natural number goes as follows:
	  $$
	  \dfrac{}{\dfrac{1}{
	  \dfrac{10}{
	  \dfrac{102}{
	  1027
	  } (glue-7)
	  } (glue-2)
	  } (glue-0)
	  } (one)
	  $$
	- To show that 032 is not a number we use [[proof by structural induction over the shape of the derivation tree]].
	- For infinite structures we use co-induction.
	-
- $\ldots,-2,-1,0,1,2,3,4,\ldots : \mathbb{Z}$
-
- +,-,*,/,^ are closed under the real numbers.
- $log_3(81)*54^{\frac{2}{3}}-721 : \mathbb{R}$ is a real number.
-
- Both functions and elements are types.
- In that sense it is more general than category theory where everything is arrows.
- a : Hask
- In Haskell each `data type` is defined from a tree structure.
- Examples:
	- $\mathbb{B}$ is the type of two values, usually true, false.
		- ```lang=Haskell
		  data Bool = True | False
		  ```
	- $\mathbb{N}$ is the type of natural numbers and can be defined as:
		- ```lang=Haskell
		  data Nat = Zero | Succ Nat
		  ```
		- `0 = Zero`
		- `4 = Succ (Succ (Succ (Succ Zero)))`
		- ```lang=Haskell
		  inf :: Nat
		  inf = Succ inf
		  ```
		  the infinite type in haskell (example of codata).
- https://cs.stackexchange.com/questions/91330/what-exactly-is-the-semantic-difference-between-set-and-type
- TODO Read haskell scripts from my old harddrive.
- Decideable type systems -> Best is Haskell Type classes
- Monomorphic functions
- Polymorphic functions
- W-types are Nat for e.g.
- Mutually inductive
- M-types are codata, streams, etc.
	- strongest thing that is consistent with some conditions
- OTT (extension of ITT introducing)
	- https://www.cs.nott.ac.uk/~psztxa/talks/constructive-06.pdf
	- Data comes with a producer contract: the producer promises that the data has only produced using the constructors.
	  Codata comes with a consumer contract: the consumer promises only to inspect the codata using the eliminators.
	  In Weak Type Theory both contracts can be made explicit:
	  Typoids for data A type + a predicate which expresses that the data is inductively generated with the constructors.
	  Setoids for codata A type + an equivalence relation which expresses the observational equivalence generated by the eliminators.
	  ITT is skewed; it is strong for data, but weak for codata.
- TODO finish: